add quick start (#4041)
Napari/napari: docs/quick_start.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# napari quick start

+++

## About napari

> napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer, with [a vibrant plugin ecosystem](https://www.napari-hub.org/) that expands its capability to tackle various domain-specific visualization and analysis needs. It is built on Qt (for the GUI), vispy (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy, and scikit-image). 

Reviewer: I like to liberally add links everywhere but they are not strictly necessary :)
```suggestion
napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer, with [a vibrant plugin ecosystem](https://www.napari-hub.org/) that expands its capability to tackle various domain-specific visualization and analysis needs. It is built on Qt (for the GUI), [vispy](https://vispy.org/) (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy, and scikit-image). 
```

napari is an open source project on [GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari) to facilitate transparency, reuse, and extensibility. 

> At its core, it provides critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for [large multi-dimensional data](https://napari.org/tutorials/applications/dask.html); provide [“layers”](https://napari.org/tutorials/start_index.html) to simultaneously visualize images, models, and analysis results; and easy manual, interactive annotation in 3D.

Reviewer 2: maybe remove "provide" in second the "provide layers" clause?

> At its core, it provides critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for [large multi-dimensional data](https://napari.org/tutorials/applications/dask.html); provide [“layers”](https://napari.org/tutorials/start_index.html) to simultaneously visualize images, models, and analysis results; and easy manual, interactive annotation in 3D.

Reviewer: I suggest using internal links whenever possible - especially to make sure that local docs build are successful and as complete as possible.
```suggestion
At its core, it provides critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for [large multi-dimensional data](tutorials/applications/dask); provide [“layers”](tutorials/start_index) to simultaneously visualize images, models, and analysis results; and easy manual, interactive annotation in 3D.
```

> This tutorial uses napari 0.4.13. <br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses napari 0.4.13.
```

+++

## What's covered here

This tutorial is for napari first-timers to give them a quick glance of what napari does, and give it a try right away. We will cover:

- Installation 
- Open napari
- Open an image
- Image display adjustment
- Manually label the cell
- Get the cell area measurement
- Next steps

> Along the way, you will see how to access napari functions from [Python code](https://napari.org/api/stable/index.html) and from GUI - though for different purposes, one method might be easier than another. This quick start guide will not cover ALL possible methods but only some ways to perform basic tasks. For the more complete guide, please visit [napari.org](https://napari.org/).

Reviewer: You can use an internal link here to the API docs:
```suggestion
Along the way, you will see how to access napari functions from [Python code](api/index) and from GUI - though for different purposes, one method might be easier than another. This quick start guide will not cover ALL possible methods but only some ways to perform basic tasks. For the more complete guide, please visit [napari.org](https://napari.org/).
```

You will also see some examples of plugins. The core napari viewer focuses on domain-agnostic functions such as layer controls. Analyses and domain specific functions, such as reading a special file format and image segmentation, live in the realm of [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/).    

+++

### Installation

- For those familiar with Python:

    napari can be installed on most macOS, Linux, and Windows systems with Python 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 using pip:

```python

> pip install 'napari[all]'

Reviewer 2: if we're targeting newcomers, we should explain conda env creation from the installation guide.  Since installing into an existing env is one of the more common sources of bugs.  for example, `napari[all]` will install pyqt5 via pip, which will very likely break their environment if they already have pyqt installed via conda

Author: Yes, I will include conda env creation steps here :)

I'm also working on another PR to update the installation and getting started pages. Right now we mix Python package installation and bundled app installation together, which can be quite confusing. 
By separating these two paths, it should be clearer what prerequisites and usage cases are specific to each.

```

- Or download the bundled app for simple installation:

    [Linux installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.13/napari-0.4.13-Linux-x86_64.zip)<br>
    [macOS installaion](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.13/napari-0.4.13-macOS-x86_64.zip)<br>
    [Windows installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.13/napari-0.4.13-Windows-x86_64.zip)<br>

    *Note: 0.4.13 bundled app is missing sample menu data ([issue 3968](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/3968))*
    
    *Note: for the latest release, please visit [here](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases) and look for Assets.*

> If you run into any issue, please visit the more detailed [installation guide](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/installation.html), or report an issue on GitHub!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run into any issues, please visit the more detailed [installation guide](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/installation.html), or [report an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new/choose)!
```

+++

### Open napari

> napari can be opened by [multiple ways](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started.html), depending on how its used in your image analysis workflow. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
napari can be opened in one of [multiple ways](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started.html), depending on how it's used in your image analysis workflow.
```

Here we will be mainly focused on the GUI application.

- From command line: 

    Once installed, simply run    
```python
napari
```

- If you installed the bundled app:

    Click on the app icon to open it.<br>
    *Note: for mac users, it may require [security setting changes](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/installation.html).*

+++

### Open an image

napari natively supports tiff and many other formats supported by [skimage.io.imread](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.io.html) as input image file format.<br>
Try with your own images or download [this ome tiff file](https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org/images/OME-TIFF/2016-06/MitoCheck/00001_01.ome.tiff).

Additional input file formats may be supported [by plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). 

> Try [napari-aicsimageio](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-aicsimageio) if you have czi, lif, or nd2 files.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit tricky! `aicsimageio` is *awesome* but just installing the plugin `napari-aicsimageio` using the napari GUI will likely not provide czi, lif, or nd2 reading. It *will* enable out-of-memory reading though, so it's still sweet, but to get those formats you need to install extra things using pip. Further, in the case of CZI the key lib is compiled so it may not install on all platforms.

Author: @psobolewskiPhD is there a reader plugin(s) that you use regularly and think would be a good example instead of aicsimageio?

Reviewer 3: AICSImageIO was one of the things that moved me to napari and python... 
It's the one I use—but it requires a bit extra on the install side.
There was some idea of changing the license on it so it would be able to bundle the proprietary types in the napari plugin for ease of (GUI) use. 
Perhaps @JacksonMaxfield can chime in?

Reviewer 4: Hey all! I would _love_ to see this recommendation make it in personally. The holdup has honestly been me -- grad school and other projects have left me with little time :sweat_smile:

That said, iirc, we got approval from allen legal to move napari-aicsimageio over to GPL license and bundle all the various reader into the dependencies. So I will try to get to that this week and make a new release that fixes that. The recommendation here then would be: "napari-aicsimageio is good for lots of different file formats but comes with a GPL license"? Idk, it seems weird to include but hard to say how much of napari-aicsimageio is used for downstream processing / analysis and not only viewing. Like will napari-aicsimageio taint the rest of the workflow constructed by a scientist with a GPL license?

Reviewer 3: The other option is that napari plugins can somehow communicate extra depends to the user. I've played around with ipython magics (https://github.com/napari/napari/discussions/3899#discussioncomment-1894365)
and `%pip install readlif` should JustWork in the napari console. the CZI one is compiled, so it's trickier, not sure about nd2...

Reviewer 4: Update: I hope to have a napari-aicsimageio patch out next week. Sorry for the delay but we have actually had development progress hahaha

Reviewer 4: Update: this should now be good to go. napari-aicsimageio v0.5.0 has been released that fixes a lot of stuff

Once you have the proper plugin installed, use File > Open Files(s)... and select the image file, or simply drag and drop the image into napari. 

For demo purpose, we will use a sample image that comes with napari.

(1) Open napari IPython console<br>
<img src="img/IPython.png" alt="IPython console" width="30%"/>

(2) Type
    
```python
from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

import napari
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer = napari.Viewer()

from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
nbscreenshot(viewer)
```

### Image display adjustment

> The layer control panel at the upper left of napari viewer allows you adjust contrast, colormap etc. These settings affect the visualization, but do not affect the underlying data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The layer controls panel at the upper left of the viewer allows you to adjust contrast, colormap, and other layer properties. These settings affect the visualization, but do not affect the underlying data.
```

> To change the image display through [API](https://napari.org/api/stable/napari.layers.Image.html), in IPython console, type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To change the image display through the [API](https://napari.org/api/stable/napari.layers.Image.html), in IPython console, type
```

```python
viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
nbscreenshot(viewer)
```

### Manually label the cell

> To measure the area of the cell, we can use labels layer and manually "paint" the cell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To measure the area of the cell, we can use a labels layer and manually "paint" the cell.
```

The labels layer allows you to record the segmentation result by assigning background = 0, and assigning each object with an integer.

> (1) Add a new labels layer <br> 

Reviewer 2: I believe you can do a markdown numbered list with:

```md
1. Add a new labels layer
2. Click on "paint"
...
```

Reviewer 5: In fact, if you use 
1.
1.
1.
in markdown, it will auto populate the numbers and makes later insertion really easy!

(2) Click on "paint" <br>
(3) Circle the cell <br>
(4) Use "fill" bucket to fill it. <br>

![manual_label](./img/manual_label.gif)

> Several plugins can perform automatic segmentation that takes image layer as input and generates labels layer as output. <br>

Reviewer 2: if you want to force a new line in markdown, use an empty line rather than `<br>`

```md
first line

new line
```

Try [cellpose-napari](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/cellpose-napari) if you have cell images.

+++

### Get the cell area measurement

> [skimage.measure.regionprops](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.measure.html#skimage.measure.regionprops) provides a good set of features that can be extracted from labels, including area measurement.

Reviewer 3: Is the full scikit-image always installed with napari? I know sample data is, but does that ensure the user has `regionprops`?
Even if it is, it may be worth mentioning this is a different (and widely used) python module (library?). For someone new to the ecosystem—e.g. me 6 mo ago—this may not be obvious.

In IPython console, type

```python
from skimage.measure import regionprops
props = regionprops(viewer.layers['Labels'].data)
print("the cell area is: ", props[0].area)
```

Alternatively, try [this plugin](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-skimage-regionprops) to have the result in a table form.

**Note:** the area reported by regionprops is the number of pixels. Check pixel size and convert the reported number to physical units.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

viewer.close_all()
```

### Next steps
- Try opening 3D or higher dimensional images, and switch to 3D view. <br>
<img src="./images/ndisplay.png" alt="ndisplay" width="30%"/><br> 

> napari provides the flexibility to handle multi-dimensional data, though the increased dimension could add to overall complexity.

Reviewer 2: might remove the line "though the increased dimension could add to overall complexity."  (not wrong, just comes off a little odd)

- Test some [examples](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples) to see how to add different layer types and add your own widgets to napari. 

- Explore other [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). A few fun ones: [napari-clusters-plotter](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-clusters-plotter), [napari-pyclesperanto-assistant](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-pyclesperanto-assistant), [napari-animation](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-animation).

> - If you don't see the functions you need in existing plugins, try to [make one](https://napari.org/plugins/stable/index.html)!

Reviewer 2: I almost want to clarify here that a plugin isn't necessary to totally customize one's own napari experience, but more when you're ready to share something that's working well for you with others.  I do worry that the napari plugin ecosystem might quick get inundated with people casually trying out (and posting to pypi) a plugin, simply because they thought it was the only way to add a widget to napari, for example.

Author: Good point. What about 

- If you don't see the functions you need in existing plugins, try to make your own [widget] (hyperlink), and publish it as a [plugin] (hyperlink) if you'd like to share with the community.

Reviewer 2: yeah, something like that.  Maybe even two sentences... so rather than "..., and publish it if you'd like to share", have a new sentence like "If you've develop some functionality that you think would benefit the community as a whole, consider publishing it as a plugin"

> - Help napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meeting](https://napari.org/community/meeting_schedule.html) and get to know the team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Help the napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meeting](https://napari.org/community/meeting_schedule.html) and get to know the team.
```

Additional input file formats may be supported [by plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). 
Try [napari-aicsimageio](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-aicsimageio) if you have czi, lif, or nd2 files.

Once you have the proper plugin installed, use File > Open Files(s)... and select the image file, or simply drag and drop the image into napari. 

For demo purpose, we will use a sample image that comes with napari.

(1) Open napari IPython console<br>
<img src="img/IPython.png" alt="IPython console" width="30%"/>

(2) Type
    
```python
from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

import napari
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer = napari.Viewer()

from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
nbscreenshot(viewer)
```

### Image display adjustment

The layer controls panel at the upper left of the viewer allows you to adjust contrast, colormap, and other layer properties. These settings affect the visualization, but do not affect the underlying data.

> To change the image display through the [API](https://napari.org/api/stable/napari.layers.Image.html), in IPython console, type

Reviewer: If you want to use internal links, you can do
```suggestion
To change the image display through the {class}`~napari.layers.Image` API, in IPython console, type
```

```python
viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
nbscreenshot(viewer)
```

### Manually label the cell

To measure the area of the cell, we can use a labels layer and manually "paint" the cell.
The labels layer allows you to record the segmentation result by assigning background = 0, and assigning each object with an integer.

1. Add a new labels layer 
1. Click on "paint"
1. Circle the cell
1. Use "fill" bucket to fill it.

> ![manual_label](./img/manual_label.gif)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![manual_label](./images/manual_label.gif)
```

```

Alternatively, try [this plugin](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-skimage-regionprops) to have the result in a table form.

**Note:** the area reported by regionprops is the number of pixels. Check pixel size and convert the reported number to physical units.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

viewer.close_all()
```

### Next steps
- napari provides the flexibility to handle multi-dimensional data. Try opening 3D or higher dimensional images, and switch to 3D view. <br>
<img src="./images/ndisplay.png" alt="ndisplay" width="30%"/><br> 

- Test some [examples](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples) to see how to add different layer types and add your own widgets to napari. 

- Explore other [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). A few fun ones: [napari-clusters-plotter](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-clusters-plotter), [napari-pyclesperanto-assistant](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-pyclesperanto-assistant), [napari-animation](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-animation).

- If you don't see the functions you need in existing plugins, try to make your own widget with [magicgui](https://napari.org/magicgui/).

> - If you've developed some functionality that you think would benefit the community as a whole, consider publish it as a [plugin](https://napari.org/plugins/stable/index.html)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you've developed some functionality that you think would benefit the community as a whole, consider publish it as a [plugin](plugins/index)!
```

> - Help the napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meeting](https://napari.org/community/meeting_schedule.html) and get to know the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Help the napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meeting](community/meeting_schedule) and get to know the team.
```
